Updated documentation on functional agents (#881)
JetBrains/koog: docs/docs/functional-agents.md

- Java 17+ installed.
- A valid API key from the LLM provider used to implement an AI agent. For a list of all available providers, refer to [Overview](index.md).
- (Optional) Ollama installed and running locally if you use this provider.

!!! tip
    Use environment variables or a secure configuration management system to store your API keys.
    Avoid hardcoding API keys directly in your source code.

## Add dependencies

The `AIAgent` class is the main class for creating agents in Koog.
Include the following dependency in your build configuration to use the class functionality:

```
dependencies {
    implementation("ai.koog:koog-agents:VERSION")
}
```
For all available installation methods, see [Installation](index.md#installation).

## Create a minimal functional agent

To create a minimal functional agent, do the following:

1) Choose the input and output types that the agent handles and create a corresponding `AIAgent<Input, Output>` instance.
   In this guide, we use `AIAgent<String, String>`, which means the agent receives and returns `String`.
2) Provide the required parameters, including a system prompt, prompt executor, and LLM.

> 3) Define the agent loop with a lambda function.

Reviewer: ...with a lambda function wrapped into a `functionalStrategy { ... }` DSL method.

Here is an example of a minimal functional agent that sends user text to a specified LLM and returns a single assistant message.

<!--- INCLUDE
import ai.koog.agents.core.agent.AIAgent
import ai.koog.agents.core.agent.asAssistantMessage
import ai.koog.agents.core.agent.requestLLMMultiple
import ai.koog.prompt.executor.llms.all.simpleOllamaAIExecutor
import ai.koog.prompt.llm.OllamaModels
import kotlinx.coroutines.runBlocking

fun main() {
    runBlocking {
-->
<!--- SUFFIX
    }
}
-->
```kotlin
// Create an AIAgent instance and provide a system prompt, prompt executor, and LLM
val mathAgent = AIAgent<String, String>(
    systemPrompt = "You are a precise math assistant.",
    promptExecutor = simpleOllamaAIExecutor(),
    llmModel = OllamaModels.Meta.LLAMA_3_2
    ) { input -> // Define the agent loop
        // Send the user input to the LLM
        val responses = requestLLMMultiple(input)
        // Extract and return the assistant message content from the response
        responses.single().asAssistantMessage().content

>     }

Reviewer: I've changed this API in https://github.com/JetBrains/koog/pull/873. Now it will be same as normal agents, but strategy will be a `functionalStrategy` :

```
val agent = AIAgent<String, String>(
    systemPrompt = "You are a precise math assistant.",
    promptExecutor = simpleOllamaAIExecutor(),
    llmModel = OllamaModels.Meta.LLAMA_3_2,
    strategy = functionalStrategy { input -> // Define the agent loop
        // Send the user input to the LLM
        val responses = requestLLMMultiple(input)
        // Extract and return the assistant message content from the response
        responses.single().asAssistantMessage().content
    }
) {
    /** install(...) features here */
}
```

fun main() {
    runBlocking {
        val toolRegistry = ToolRegistry {
            tools(MathTools())
        }
-->
<!--- SUFFIX
    }
}
-->
```kotlin
val mathWithTools = AIAgent<String, String>(
    systemPrompt = "You are a precise math assistant. When multiplication is needed, use the multiplication tool.",
    promptExecutor = simpleOllamaAIExecutor(),
    llmModel = OllamaModels.Meta.LLAMA_3_2,
    toolRegistry = toolRegistry
) { input -> // Define the agent loop extended with tool calls
    // Send the user input to the LLM
    var responses = requestLLMMultiple(input)

    // If the LLM requests tools
    while (responses.containsToolCalls()) {
        // Extract tool calls from the response
        val pendingCalls = extractToolCalls(responses)
        // Execute the tools and return the results
        val results = executeMultipleTools(pendingCalls)
        // Send the tool results back to the LLM. The LLM may call more tools or return a final output
        responses = sendMultipleToolResults(results)
    }

    // When no tool calls remain, extract and return the assistant message content from the response
    responses.single().asAssistantMessage().content

> }

Reviewer: Same here, it will be changed to :

```
val mathWithTools = AIAgent<String, String>(
    systemPrompt = "You are a precise math assistant. When multiplication is needed, use the multiplication tool.",
    promptExecutor = simpleOllamaAIExecutor(),
    llmModel = OllamaModels.Meta.LLAMA_3_2,
    toolRegistry = toolRegistry,
    strategy = functionalStrategy { input -> // Define the agent loop extended with tool calls
        // Send the user input to the LLM
        var responses = requestLLMMultiple(input)
    
        // If the LLM requests tools
        while (responses.containsToolCalls()) {
            // Extract tool calls from the response
            val pendingCalls = extractToolCalls(responses)
            // Execute the tools and return the results
            val results = executeMultipleTools(pendingCalls)
            // Send the tool results back to the LLM. The LLM may call more tools or return a final output
            responses = sendMultipleToolResults(results)
        }
    
        // When no tool calls remain, extract and return the assistant message content from the response
        responses.single().asAssistantMessage().content
    }
)
```

# Functional agents

Functional agents are lightweight AI agents that operate without building complex strategy graphs.
Instead, the agent logic is implemented as a lambda function that handles user input, interacts with an LLM,
optionally calls tools, and produces a final output. It can perform a single LLM call,

> manage multiple LLM calls in a sequence, or repeat in a loop when needed based on user input and LLM and tool outputs.

Reviewer: Let's add about the reasoning here:
It's recommended to start with the out-of-the-box simple agent -------> then you can easily prototype the logic using functional agents by just writing plain Kotlin code because it's east and feels natural -- but still with the access to most of the Koog's features, including history compression and automatic state management ------> and finally, if you need Persistence and checkpointing for fault-tolerance, and better OpenTelemetry tracing with nested graph events -- you can refactor your agents to graph strategies and get the most reliability that Koog can offer!

> optionally calls tools, and produces a final output. It can perform a single LLM call,
> manage multiple LLM calls in a sequence, or repeat in a loop when needed based on user input and LLM and tool outputs.

Author: ```suggestion
optionally calls tools, and produces a final output. It can perform a single LLM call, process multiple LLM calls in sequence, or loop based on user input, as well as LLM and tool outputs.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

!!! tip
    - If you already have a simple [single-run agent](single-run-agents.md) as your first MVP, but run into task-specific limitations, use a functional agent to prototype custom logic. You can implement custom control flows in plain Kotlin while still using most Koog features, including history compression and automatic state management.
    - For production-grade needs, refactor your functional agent into a [complex workflow agent](complex-workflow-agents.md) with strategy graphs. This provides persistence with controllable rollbacks for fault-tolerance and advanced OpenTelemetry tracing with nested graph events.

```

This page guides you through the steps necessary to create a minimal functional agent and extend it with tools.

> 
> !!! tip
>     - If you are new to Koog and want to create the simplest agent, start with [Single-run agents](single-run-agents.md).
>     - If you want to create an agent with complex strategy graphs, check [Complex workflow agents](complex-workflow-agents.md).

Author: ```suggestion
```
